Assignment 2
COL775: Deep Learning
Semester II, 2025–2026
Due Date: May 7, 2026
Notes:
•You should usePython=3.10andPytorch=2.5.0+cu11.8for all your programming solutions.
•You should submit all your code as well as any graphs that you might plot. Submit all the code in .py
files and all answers to theory questions; all graphs should be submitted in a PDF. Do not submit any
thoery in the code files. Do not submit the datasets.
•Include asingle write-up (pdf) filewhich includes a brief description for each question explaining
what you did. Include any observations and/or plots required by the question in this single write-up
file.
•Your code should have appropriate documentation for readability. Demo will also be conducted in
which you will have to explain your code. You will be graded based on what you have submitted as
well as your ability to explain your code.
•The readability and presentation in your report will also carry marks. While there is no specific format,
you are advised to be clear, concise and complete in your answers with explanations wherever required.
•A substantial portion of your marks will be based on the accuracy achieved, so ensure that your models
are trained thoroughly and properly.
•Your assignment will be run on autograder scripts. Detailed instructions regarding this and submission
guidelines of code will follow soon. Till then, please start working on writing the functions for your
code.
•This assignment can be done in groups of 2 or 3 students. Use this google form to fill out
your team details
•Refer to the course website for assignment submission instructions.
•We plan to run Moss on the submissions. We will also include submissions from previous years since
some of the questions may be repeated. Any cheating will result in a zero on the assignment, an
additional penalty upto the negative of the total weightage of the assignment and possibly much
stricter penalties (including afail gradeand/or referring to aDisCo). Please note that using any
AI tools is not allowed.
1
Overview
In this assignment you’ll build a comprehensive understanding of modern representation learning by explor-
ing three complementary paradigms: weakly-supervised contrastive learning, self-supervised learning and
generative modelling. All experiments will be conducted on a version of CLEVR dataset [3], along with
programatically generated captions. Data is available here.
In the first part (A/Aa), you’ll implement from scratch two influential works in this space : CLIP [5] and
DINO [1]. CLIP leverages weak supervision through image-text contrastive learning, while DINO relies on
self-supervised knowledge distillation to learn visual features without labels. You will train both models
and analyze the learned representation through linear probing on downstream tasks such as object counting,
color/shape prediction etc.
In the second part (B), you will extend these learned visual representations to build a general purpose vision-
language model (VLM). This involves integrating a pre-trained language model with the vision encoder and
aligning the two modalities in a two-stage training pipeline inspired by LLaVA [4]. By freezing the vision
encoder and training a projection interface, you will study how effectively the learned representations sup-
port language grounding and reasoning on CLEVR.
In part (C), you will implement a Variational Auto-Encoder (VAE) to learn a dense latent-representation
on this dataset. Using which you’ll train a text-guided Latent Diffusion Model (LDM) to generate diverse
CLEVR scene from any given caption.
1 (A) Representation Learning
In this section, you will implement and train two separate models. Your goal is to learn a high-dimensional
embedding space where images with similar semantic concepts (e.g., object counts, colors, shapes) are clus-
tered together, without using explicit classification labels. Only use the data insidePart Adirectory for this
part.
1.1 Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training (CLIP)
You will implement a weakly-supervised model inspired by CLIP. You will use the programmatically gen-
erated captions provided in the datasets to align image and text modalities. We only provide some basic
hyper-parameter details, however you should read the paper carefully to understand other detailed nuances.
Figure 1: CLIP framework, Source: [5]
2
As shown in 1, the model consists of an image encoder, a text encoder, and a shared embedding space
in which aligned image–text pairs are brought close together using a contrastive objective.
Overall model:Given an imageIand its captionT, the model produces an image embeddingv∈R d
and a text embeddingt∈R d. Both embeddings areℓ 2-normalized and compared using temperature-scaled
cosine similarity. The temperature is a learnable parameter and is initialized to log(1/0.07), following the
details described in the CLIP paper [5]
Vision Transformer image encoder:The visual pipeline should follows the standard ViT design [2].
The image encoder is a Vision Transformer consisting of 12 transformer layers, 6 attention heads per layer,
hidden dimension 384 and MLP dimension 1536. In the experiments use the patch size of 16 and the input
image resolution is fixed at 224×224. You must project your final output into a 512 dimensional shared
space. Each transformer layer can be implemented via Pytorch abstractions likenn.MultiheadAttention,
nn.Linearetc. Use of fully abstracted Transformer and TransformerLayer is not allowed.
Text encoder:The text branch is a lightweight transformer. It should be implemented with 6 transformer
layers, 6 attention heads, 384 hidden dimension and 1536 MLP dimension. Refer to [6] for details. After
the transformer stack, the representation of the final non-padding token (effectively the end-of-text token)
should be projected into the joint embedding space( 512 dimensional ).
Tokenizer and Caption representation:Instead of using a pretrained tokenizer, You should construct
a simple task-specific tokenizer directly from the training captions. You can choose a fixed context length
for training the model. Each caption is formed directly from the scene graph and encodes object count and
attributes such as size, color, material, and shape. A typical caption has the form:
An image with 3 objects: 1 small red metal cube, 2 large blue rubber spheres
Since, no spatial information is used in the captions, therefore many different images can share the same
caption. If several identical captions appear in one contrastive batch, the learning signal becomes less clean.
You must take this into account while constructing your batches.
Objective Function and OptimizationTraining uses the standard symmetric CLIP objective described
in the paper. You can follow these parameters as default, however feel free to experiment on the best setting
that works for you (You can refer to the paper for additional values of hyper-params): Optimizer=AdamW,
learning rate= 5×10 −4, weight decay= 0.2,β 1 = 0.9,β 2 = 0.98,ϵ= 10 −6, epochs: 100, LR Scheduler:
Cosine Decay with Linear warmup.
1.2 Self-Supervised Distillation - DINO
You will implement a self-supervised model inspired by DINO. Unlike CLIP, this model does not use text at
all. It learns visual representations by enforcing consistency between different augmented views of the same
image. Similar to CLIP, we only provide basic hyper-parameter details, you should carefully read the [1]
for detailed instructions.
Overall framework:The model consists of two networks with identical architecture:
•astudentnetwork, which is updated by gradient descent,
•ateachernetwork, not updated by backpropagation; instead, its parameters are updated as an expo-
nential moving average of the student parameters.
Both the Teacher and Student models must use the same Vision Transformer backbone as used in CLIP
(12 layers, 6 heads and 384 hidden dimension). On top of the ViT backbone, both models use a projection
head of 4096 dimension which maps the backbone feature into the space used for self-distillation. (Note that
this is different from the paper which uses a 65536 dimensional feature space). Feel free to figure out what
works best here as well.
3
Multi-crop data augmentation:A central component of DINO is the augmentation pipeline. For each
image, the transform produces: (1) twoglobal cropsof size 224×224, (2) severallocal cropsof size 96×96.
You can use the default number of local crops as 8, so each image yields 10 views in total. Refer to the paper
for more details on the different augmentation strategies applicable.
Teacher–student training rule:During training, the student receives all augmented views and the
teacher receives only the two global views. The teacher is not updated by backpropagation. Instead, its
parameters are updated as an exponential moving average of the student parameters as specified in the
paper. The objective function is cross-entropy between the teacher probability distribution for one global
crop and the student prediction for every other crop of the same image, excluding the matching same-view
pair. The final loss averages this over all valid teacher–student crop pairs. Refer to Equation 3 in [1].
Centering mechanism.A key stabilization component is the runningcenterwhich is an exponential
moving average of the teacher outputs across batches. Before applying softmax to the teacher outputs,
the current center is subtracted. Refer to Equation 4 and Algorithm 1 in [1]. This prevents the teacher
distribution from becoming too peaky and helps avoid representation collapse.
Optimization.Training is performed only on the student network. The optimizer to be used is AdamW
with same default hyper-parameters as CLIP. You’re free to ablate your hyper-parameter choices.
2 (Aa) Representation Analysis
Once training is complete, you willfreeze the weightsof all Vision Encoders (from both CLIP and DINO).
The goal of this section is to rigorously evaluate whether the learned representations capture meaningful
semantic concepts such as object count, color composition, and shape composition.
You will perform bothquantitativeandqualitativeanalyses to probe the structure and utility of the
learned embedding space. Only use the data insidePart Aadirectory for this part.
2.1 Linear Probing
Linear probing is a standard protocol for evaluating representation quality by measuring how easily down-
stream tasks can be solved using a simple linear classifier on frozen features. We’ll use two tasks, (1) Object
Count Prediction and (2) Color Set Prediction, you’ll find the corresponding .json files and images in the
dataset. Extract the fixed-dimensional image embeddings from the frozen Vision-Encoders and train a single
linear layer classifier (no hidden layers or activation) on top of them.
•Use appropriate loss functions i.e Cross-Entropy for Counting task and Binary-Cross Entropy (multi-
label) for shape prediction task.
•Ensure that only linear classifier’s weights are updated during training.
•Report the classification accuracy for Counting Task and F1 score for Color-Prediction Task, specifically
fill the values in Table 1.
•Provide brief analysis discussing:
–Describe you results, which model performs better on which tasks?
–Which model encodes semantic attributes most effectively?
4
Model
[CLS] Embedding GAP over Patches
Counting Color Pred. Counting Color Pred.
Train Val Train Val Train Val Train Val
CLIP
DINO Student
DINO Teacher
Table 1: Representation analysis across models and embedding strategies. GAP refers to Global-Average-
Pooling operation, which averages the output embeddings of allNimage patches (excluding [CLS] token),
resulting in a singleD-dimensional vector.
2.2 t-SNE Visualization
To complement quantitative evaluation, you will perform a qualitative analysis of the embedding space using
t-SNE(t-distributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding). Use the extracted embeddings of training set (70K
images) and project them into a 2D space. Generate scatter plots for CLIP and both DINO models (Student
and Teacher), color coding each point based on the object count in the image to visualize the global structure.
Analyze and comment your observations.
2.3 Cross-Modal Retrieval using CLIP
To further evaluate the semantic consistency of the learned representations in CLIP, you will perform an
retrievaltask based on nearest neighbors in the embedding space.
For each image in thevalidationsplit, compute its embedding and retrieve the embedded captions from
a pool consisting of all validation captions. Both image and text embeddings are L2-normalized, and simi-
larity is computed using cosine similarity. ReportRecall@K (R@1, R@3), which measures whether the
ground-truth caption is among the top-K retrieved results. Additionally evaluate text→image retrieval by
using each caption as a query and retrieving images from the validation set. Report thesame (R@1 and
R@3)metrics.
Show a few queries alongside their top retrieved neighbors for both (Image→Text and Text→Image retrieval).
Comment on success and failure cases for both.
Submission Guidelines:
Please submit your fully documented code, the trained model weights, and a final PDF report containing
your plots, metric tables, and a brief discussion comparing the two paradigms. Detailed guidelines will be
released later.
Parts (B) and (C) coming soon
5
References
[1] Mathilde Caron, Hugo Touvron, Ishan Misra, Herv´ e J´ egou, Julien Mairal, Piotr Bojanowski, and Armand
Joulin. Emerging properties in self-supervised vision transformers, 2021.
[2] Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas Un-
terthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, Jakob Uszkoreit, and
Neil Houlsby. An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale, 2021.
[3] Justin Johnson, Bharath Hariharan, Laurens van der Maaten, Li Fei-Fei, C. Lawrence Zitnick, and Ross
Girshick. Clevr: A diagnostic dataset for compositional language and elementary visual reasoning, 2016.
[4] Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Qingyang Wu, and Yong Jae Lee. Visual instruction tuning, 2023.
[5] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish
Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya Sutskever. Learning
transferable visual models from natural language supervision, 2021.
[6] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez, Lukasz
Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need, 2023.
6
